Thank you. Was about to
>> Is Kim not coming?
>> Kim's here.
>> Oh,
where?
Oh. Oh, okay. I'm sorry.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Um,
right then. So, this is our second joint
border select man board of finance
meeting for February 25th.
We're going to do start with the pledge
of allegiance. It's 6:02 p.m.
>> Pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
republic for it stands
one nation under God,
>> indivisible, liberty and justice for
all.
>> Okay. Thank you. So, we will start with
public speak. I'll go around real quick.
Um,
members of the public that are on, we've
got Joanne Heert.
>> Hey Rob, just listening. Thank you.
>> No problemmo. Uh, oh, and we have Nick
now. That's good. Um,
>> Dennis, I see that you're on. Uh, yes. I
don't know if you count as a member of
the public exactly, but
>> Oh, probably a member of the public.
Yeah, among many other things, Rob. But
I am I'm also the town attorney, of
course.
>> Yes, that's what I was referring to. So,
um, do you have any public comment?
>> Yeah, I do. I mean, I I was, you know, I
attended your meeting last week and I I
did say in a letter that I wrote to, uh,
oh, all three boards, uh, including and
and the superintendent of schools and,
yeah, well, Jeff is a member of the
other of the board of selectmen that I
plan to come this week and talk a little
bit about what I've been saying about
uh, how the board of finance should be
handling the education budget. And I am
convinced beyond a doubt after
researching it, considering it, uh,
considering my experience with several
towns, I have never heard of a board of
finance just passing a budget, a
education budget on to a town meeting.
And I don't I don't believe that I'm not
saying that you have to cut it. I'm
saying that you you you can cut it. You
can adjust it. You can up adjust it
upward, but but to just pass it on, you
I mean, you have in the past always
voted, but you have voted at times to
just adopt whatever the board of ed
education suggested. I'm just saying to
you that you have the authority to cut
the education budget before it goes to
uh town meeting. You are a guardrail.
You are experts on finance, relatively
speaking, to the the rest of the town.
the statute that covers uh uh if you
didn't have a charter, you would be
governed by 7-344.
Uh and that because you have a unitary
budget. It's a it starts out that way.
You can you can bifrocate it if it goes
something goes wrong, but it starts out
as a unitary budget. Unitary budget is
governed by uh 802F.
Uh you cited 80 Rob when you decided
that uh that statute applies I mean that
provision applies to the pub the public
hearing you can send the you can you are
to send the budget of the board of
education to public hearing which is
required you're required to have a
public hearing you know that you can
send that intact you don't you don't
have to in fact you you're required by
the charter to send it intact to not
touch it but once Once the public
hearing is over, you then, you know,
need to send it to town meeting. And
when you send it to town meeting, you
have the option to vote uh for it as is
up or down. That's all I'm saying. I've
said it now in 13 pages and three
separate letters in in in several
different ways. But it is uh my opinion
that if it if if a if it ever and hope
hopefully it will never happen where you
have a dispute between agencies that
ends up in court because it does happen
in other towns, not over things like
this. Uh I I don't know of any judge
that would ever rule in favor of you
saying that you you cannot cut the board
of education budget. One of the roles
that you have as as a board of finance
is to uh comp uh decide among competing
interests for the town and you need to
have a fair uh a level playing field and
if you're not if you're if you feel you
cannot adjust the board of education
budget say downward for example uh and
you but you do adjust the town hall
budget downward that's not a fair
playing field and the and and and the
and the statute uh and the and the uh if
you look at the section 802 of the
charter, it's a progression. It starts
out with u back in the fall where you
have these discussions about the budgets
and then it goes well bing bing bing
bing all the way down to E and F and you
you you relied on E. E is for the public
hearing. F is what you do when you put
the bu budget to the town meeting. And
that is it's up to you what to do with
it. You can cut it, you can raise it,
you can keep it the same. But you uh I
heard Mark uh your former chairman last
year. I was sitting at the town meeting
and when I heard him say that I I was
like stunned that that you you did not
have to act on the budget. Well, you
have to act on and you always have acted
on it, but you need to know that you can
act uh on it and you can increase it or
you can cut it before you send it to the
town meeting. That is the way it's done
in every town I've ever been in and I've
been in a lot of them. And it's it's it
it makes sense because that is what the
law requires. and and you're because you
have a charter, you can have your own
system, but and and you could you could
do that, but you don't the language of
your charter in section 802F
requires you or allows you doesn't
require you, but it but it allows you to
uh to cut the education budget before it
goes to uh before it goes to town
meeting or to increase it or leave it
the same. But you have that option. It
is not an automatic, oh, we passed this
budget on to the uh town meeting just as
it's as it comes from the BOE.
That's when you that's when you play
your role as the guardrail.
And that's what that's what that's what
7-344,
which is the law governing all towns
that don't have charters, uh, require.
And also, you're in your charter and the
language is not is not as clear as I'd
like it to be. I didn't write it. It was
It's been in there for ages. And I've
been in I've been with the town for more
than 22 23 years. We've we've made a lot
of changes to the charter at the request
of charter revision commissions, but
that one never came up. And it's
probably something where the language
ought to be clarified. But after going
over it and reading it and comparing it
to state law and my experience, I am
convinced absolutely that that section
of the charter 802 ends with a reference
to town meeting and you can act on both
budgets or all budgets that come before
you up or down. Make recommendations and
once it gets to town meeting, you've set
the ceiling on the budgets. Okay? They
can't and that's in the statute. It's
also in in your charter. the the town
meeting cannot raise as you know cannot
raise the amount uh they can't cut and
you know it happened last year when you
when you uh the the in a different under
a different section of the charter
albeit and that was after the budget
failed that referendum came back to you
and uh a motion was made to cut the
increase for the board of education from
8% to 5% and it passed and and and so
And then it passed. I assume I didn't
follow it all the way, but I think it
passed that uh uh referendum. So,
>> yes, it it did. So, you know, so you got
the 5% increase and and you know, that
that is that is it as far as I'm
concerned. And I I've read the opinion
from the uh the attorney for the uh
board of education. I just totally
disagree with it. I've written a
response to it. It's very short. It
didn't have to be long. So I am going to
uh I'm going to stop now. I think I've
said what I need to say unless you have
any questions.
>> No, I can only note that we have dueling
legal opinions in front of us. Um beyond
that, I'm very clear on your position,
Dennis.
>> Thank you, sir. Ben, thank you for the
time and uh thank you for uh giving me
the opportunity to speak and for
everybody's uh giving me the attention.
Thank you.
>> Thank you. Okay. Uh, does anybody see
any member of the public that I've
missed? I don't see anyone in the list.
I think that was it.
>> That's all I see.
>> Okay.
>> So, we will move on to our workshop.
>> Now, I don't know if all of you have,
you know, seen the latest uh emails that
have coming around. In fact, I need to
double check that it went to everybody,
but I finally do have a preliminary
budget spreadsheet uh from the
treasurer, which is helpful. So, thank
you for that, Lisa. I really appreciate
it. Uh the right now it's got the um the
older RAM number in there. I I caught
that when I saw it. We only just
recently, I think today, uh got the
updated levy number sorted out. It was
either yesterday or today. So that has
to be changed obviously and everyone
should understand that that spreadsheet
is preliminary a work in progress etc.
Um so if anybody didn't get it let me
just double check here. Um the Excel
spreadsheet went to I think all of us.
So we shouldn't I shouldn't need to
email it around again but if somebody
doesn't have it let me know. So we have
that to look at which is great. Um,
so I guess my thought is one of the
other piece of information that I have
asked for uh that's kind of out there is
I'd like to know what are in our fund
balances now all of all the various town
funds so that when we look at capital
and things like that we know where we're
starting from. Um so that's another info
request that's out there. Um but I guess
I' my gut here is I'd also like to hear
from the board of selectman members a
little bit. I don't I don't feel like we
got into it very much last meeting on
what they what their vision is for the
town operations budget, the town capital
budgets that we have in front of us to
review. You know, kind of maybe just the
high points would be helpful to walk us
through it. Obviously, right now, if I'm
reading the spreadsheet correctly, we're
looking at a on the town side, the ops
budget of 4.3% increase for various
reasons. And I did not have a chance to
go line by line. and I scrolled through
it pretty quickly. Uh, you know, only
having gotten it a couple hours ago. So,
>> does Hi,
>> I see the Excel version yet in my
emails. Did it come to the board of
selectman?
>> Let me double check.
No, it's sorry. It's uh it's to the
board of finance members and um and uh
Jeff's on Jeff CC, but none of the other
board of selectman members have it. So,
I can send that around.
>> That'd be great. Thank you.
Now, I'm just going to tell you with
everything that's happened in town with
the weather and all of the transactions
that uh
Lisa and I have been trying to deal
with, uh we the board of selectman
hasn't even had a meeting. So, to be
really honest, this has to sit there and
get in front of the board of selectmen.
So, Ann is not wrong that she hasn't
received it.
Um, I've been working with Lisa to sit
there and build a u summary of all of
the positions within town to tie it to
our payroll. And it's been slightly
difficult in
that there's no remote access into the
information that is available. So,
everything has to be done by getting to
the town hall. And with the weather and
everything else that happened, uh, it
got a little of a little bit of a
problem. So to be really honest, um the
board of finance is going to have to sit
there and take that document as
preliminary again until the board of
selectmen can get together and meet.
>> Okay.
>> Um and I fully understand all of that.
That's that's totally understandable. Uh
obviously, you know what I'm looking at?
I'm looking at the the days ticking away
and the calendar that we're that we have
and the schedule that we have. Well, in
my head, Rob, if um
if we can get the uh personnel side of
this taken care of, that'll take that
from the town side, we'll take and
account for about 55 to 60% of the total
budget. And then we'll be looking at the
capital side of it, which will take up
the other 40% of it. And then you just
have a small fraction in the middle that
we'll sit there and deal with. So you
know you really have about 55% in
salaries probably about another 30% in
capital and then the rest will be the si
the small isolated items but as far as
the employees go and the non unionuned
employees the board of selectmen needs
to sit there and get together and vote
as to what increases we want to sit
there and see for those positions. So,
uh, I apologize, but it's just something
that with the transition. So, Jim, who's
on here, uh, everybody might as well
say, uh, thank you and, uh, goodbye to
Jim because he's be he's done on
Thursday. Um,
so that position is going to be open. I
will sit there and um
uh do what I can in my time to sit there
and handle the uh
that spot until the board of selectmen
sits there and makes a decision as to
what they're doing with the town
administrator. So when they decide what
they're doing there, we'll sit there and
have uh someone else come into that
chair. But uh what I plan to do with
Lisa is sit there and work with her.
Lisa's, like I said the last meeting,
Lisa's great. She was in over the
weekend. Uh, she hasn't got her laptop
from the IT company. She can't sit there
and work from home. So, she's got to be
where she's at right now in the office
so that she can sit there and answer any
of your questions uh and have access
into the accounting system and uh we
will sit there and get it done and you
guys will get the right information so
that you can make decisions for the
budget.
Hope so. Go ahead.
>> Um, is there any way that Jim can be
extended?
>> Uh, Jim's moving to North Carolina, but
Jim can answer that one.
>> I've already actually moved to North
Carolina. I went down there on the 7th
and then came back up to kind of close
up shop up here and then finish the
month for you guys.
>> Okay. Congratulations.
>> Thank you.
>> I do have to thank Jim. He's done a very
good job representing the town. I wish
he did a better job on our budget, but I
won't take him to account for that.
Right.
>> That's right.
>> Thank you, Jim.
>> We're going to miss you.
>> Appreciate it. Thank you.
>> Where are we in the process of
replacement?
>> Um,
you're going to have to ask one of the
other selectmen.
>> Okay.
meeting on Friday with two more
interviews.
After that, we may have something.
>> Okay.
>> All right. So, in progress, but not
imminent.
Um,
in terms of the preliminary budget, uh,
one of the things I wanted to ask about,
and obviously other members of the board
of finance, you know, by all means, pipe
up, but don't, you know, I'm not the
only one to ask questions here, but h
how are we feeling on the revenue side
about the projections there? Have we
looked, have those been really looked
at, or are we just kind of plugging in
last year's numbers for the most part? I
see there's a small bump. Uh, but is
like is the ECS grant money that's in
there, is that likely to be the real
number or is that maybe low? I think
that looks just like last year's number.
>> They haven't raised that number, which
is one of our problems. They haven't
raised the rate since 2013. It's a
problem for the the states. It's problem
for a small town like ours because we're
not getting any additional assistance
from the state with all the mandates
that they're requiring. So that that
number which is our biggest outside
number isn't I don't expect it to
change. You know one of the numbers that
Lisa and I were talking about today is u
interest the interest number that's on
there is probably going to decrease. We
have to sit there and make some
adjustments to that and we have to sit
there and see how we can improve that
number if at all possible down the road.
So
>> that's for like basically the stiff
account.
>> Yep. stiff
>> account.
>> Now, just for you guys, for all your
understanding, trying to get access to
all these with the limited uh
with the p previous treasurer limiting
her access to us and her assistance to
us has been difficult. So, we're still
trying to sit there and get um the Lisa
access to that
hasn't been easy. Okay.
Well, I don't know if any of the members
of my board have really had a chance to
look at this thing. Um, I have, as I
said, only really had a chance to glance
through it, kind of scan over it, look
for any particularly eyepopping, you
know, spots. A lot of this is kind of
mandated 3% raises.
um
>> that that number has not has been not
has been has not been approved by the
board of selectman. that number is
really consistent with the union
contracts that we have out there that um
my goal is as discussions with the
treasurer were today is to get you all
of those contracts and everything
related to the
uh employee compensation that we have so
that you guys so all the board members
can have all of the contracts. of the
cont previous contract from the
administrator, the union contract. So
you can follow along with what those
raises um the increases in the
compensation are. So
okay,
um tax revenue appears to be plugged in
just our last year's number. I would
expect that to change a little bit,
right? I mean, it creeps up here and
there if we have houses built in town or
whatnot, right? Changes the grand list.
>> Supposedly, the uh assessor got our
filings completed
and we will at least have an
understanding of what the grand list is
supposed to be.
So, that's coming next week.
>> Next week. Okay.
>> At least I hope so.
>> Okay.
>> I mean, Jim, that was what your
understanding was, correct? Just so I'm
clear, that was the email that you
received before we left the office.
>> It would be filed tomorrow.
>> Okay.
>> Were there any um
decisions or changes made to staffing
that will affect the budget at all?
Um, well, from my perspective, the only
thing, Liz, that we really need to deal
with is honestly the community center.
So, the board of selectman needs to
decide what they're going to do with
contracts that are currently uh
outstanding at the community center and
what type of staffing levels that we're
going to have there.
Can I just add I thought we were going
to discuss adding a 20our per week admin
assistant for the incoming town
administrator
to
>> Yes.
>> for continuity in that office. We had we
did discuss that and we were going to
discuss it on January 29th
but we never did have the meeting and
then the meeting on February 4th was
also cancelled. So maybe we can set up a
meeting for this coming week so that we
don't hinder the board of finance with
the dates and everything defined by our
charter.
>> Sure. And uh on that current document
that you have
15 there's $15,000 y
>> in for the administrative assistant and
plus there's another $15,000 in for a
project manager.
>> I see those. So those might be
consolidated and as to what Carol is
discussing, uh they've been left there
because as placeholders. Um but um yeah,
we probably do need to have a meeting.
We're probably not going to have it this
week because I know there's another
meeting on the agenda for Friday and uh
we'll have to figure out when the board
of selectmen can actually get together.
>> That would be helpful. Um you know, just
so you all are aware, you probably
already know this, but I'll run through
it real quick.
on the 4th uh our next budget workshop
meeting uh we will have presentations by
the fire department and by AES and then
on the 11th we have I believe public
works coming in so and then we have the
18th and then we have the 25th and April
1st is the hearing
so that's our time frame
>> can you say that again
>> from 3:18
Yeah, I think we just meet weekly
throughout March, the 4th, the 11th, the
18th, and the 25th. Um, yeah. And then,
>> please make sure you get together with
Kate because I had looked at that. Um,
there's nothing on the calendar, the
town calendar on the 4th.
>> The fourth, I emailed her literally
tonight. I c um, somebody caught that,
texted me, and I emailed her right away
to say, "No, no, no. We're having a
we're having a special virtual budget
workshop meeting that night. Can we get
it on the calendar?
>> Could we meet on Monday night, Jeff, if
everyone is available? That would
>> put us that much further ahead.
>> Um,
>> please. I would I I would ask and and
this is something that we need to talk
about but later in the week because I
still don't
I I I am planning on being in that
office tomorrow dealing with Jim to get
everything situated for his his
departure. And then I need to get some
access to some other things Carol to be
able to produce the
what I need done. So Monday might be too
soon is what I'm saying. So today's
today's Wednesday.
Uh let me find out tomorrow. Carol, I'll
actually sit there and text the group.
Maybe I can sit there and get it done
tomorrow.
>> I'm just saying rather than hinder the
board of finance because again they're
under
>> Listen, we're hindering
>> stressful timelines. I know we're
hindering a lot. So we really need to
move forward with this.
>> You guys, you love us. So
>> we're good.
>> No, I don't think they're going to love
us if we continue doing things like
this. I don't think anybody's going to
love us. So,
>> but you know,
>> we you do what you can. Try your best.
Try to you know, you know what our
schedule is. You know what the time
frames are.
>> I'm not trying to berate anybody. I know
exactly how
how, you know, discombobulated
everything is. Um, but I just bring it
up because it's the obvious thing. Um,
so there's not a lot in the way of
clarity. Typically with the board of
finance in the past, we what we've tried
to do once we have this spreadsheet in
what we think is reasonable shape. Uh
you know, we usually try to take two
meetings of ours where the entire time
is spent just going through it line by
line and typically in the past of course
with the town administrator there to
help us with questions. Um obviously
that's not not looking like how it's
going to go. Uh but in the past we've
discovered that if we tried to do the
whole document in one night, uh we were
on a meeting until 11:30 p.m. and uh we
were all fried and it wasn't actually
very productive. So
I am open depending on how this all
comes together. We'll have to talk about
this on the 4th and or 11th as to
whether or not guys we want to try to
put together another special workshop on
like a Thursday or something to stick
another meeting in there
later in the later in March.
So, just think about that.
>> Just think about like what your
availability is, what what dates might
work best for you. Thursdays tend to
work for me. Um, other days of the week
other than Wednesdays get harder, but
I'm I'm not going to rule them out. You
know, if we have to do it, we have to do
it because we, you know, either we hit
the deadline or we don't. Uh, it's in
the charter. We're we're bound by that.
So, um, okay. So, you know, without
laboring that,
uh, if any of our board members has, you
know, questions or concerns about
what we've been given so far in terms of
our preliminary projection, uh, by all
means, pipe up.
Um,
you know,
not a lot here's jumping out. Jeff's
already kind of addressed the fact that
the staffing at the community center is
is one of the things that's in flux. The
and then Carol brought up, you know, the
assistant to the administrator and
obviously with the administrator
position itself that is being bumped up
in this preliminarily at least. Um, but
I, you know, there's a lot here that's
just uh
it's not stuff we can really dig into
because it hasn't really been decided
yet. This is this is just a first pass.
Okay,
I admit I'm a little unsure as to what
we can productively discuss then
further in this joint meeting if we
don't have you know the boardman simply
hasn't had the chance to make some of
these critical decisions
>> without without the payroll role
summary, the staffing summary. You guys
have a a you can go through certain
items here
and and
well, let's actually talk about what we
can do. So, out of the departments that
are in that report,
>> uh who do you have appointment who do
you have appointments scheduled with
like from um
>> fire and public works?
Yeah,
>> fire public works and AES and we already
had RAM.
>> Okay.
Um
>> I'm trying to remember in the past
whether we you know every single
department came in regardless of size. I
know we always did fire and public
works.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> so I was I've been going through it. So
you have um and and this is Lisa. Have
you provided them the information like
from the registars's office?
Um, you're on mute. You're on mute.
You're on mute, Lisa.
>> Registers.
>> Sorry.
>> That's okay.
>> I see a registister's document. She sent
today.
>> Okay. So, like there's certain groups
that have have have come back to
the treasurer. So the the registars was
one. Um the resident state trooper is
another.
Animal control we can talk about and and
go through some of this information to
you know they're external groups. You
know it's like that secondary stuff
that's out there and then you guys can
take the data and then ask the questions
and we can go back to the groups and and
get it done. So in in my view, you know,
the board of assessment appeals, it's
tiny, but they have actually uh provided
the treasurer with information. Um,
and I don't know if you want to have
them on it. Like one of the things Lisa
uh was bringing up as a recommendation
was that in the future, we just sit
there and have these all scheduled out
in advance on an agenda on a list.
They're showing up for your board and
they're doing these presentations for
you on a given day. No more waiting
around. And and listen, the whole thing
in my head that's really been the
problem is that Eric was in the chair
all day all along fighting through these
numbers, giving you guys every piece of
information you wanted, and we're at a
slight disadvantage trying to circle
back into this. So, we'll do it. Um uh
and and Lisa, I don't know if you sent
out to the board of finance members or
or just to Rob the data that you had
collected from those groups. I did uh
send out the eight that we took copies
of and labeled. So those of them those
did go out to the board of finance
today.
>> Okay.
>> I've got MURF registars assessment
appeals
state trooper animal control Eastern
highlands health and ahm.
>> Yeah. And so each one of those you know
like the state trooper the state trooper
is uh you know a budget request of
$163,816.
there's nothing we can really do on that
line item other than get a get a cheaper
resident state trooper uh which I don't
necessarily know that we can and we we
have no authority over what happens at
that position. So they've provided that
data and then you know if you you go up
there's information that we got from
Crag that goes into line 4177 but we
haven't gotten the CCM cost update or
the cost update for the the there's two
different organizations that we belong
to. So we need so that number is down
but that number is down just because
we've only gotten one of the three
organizations.
um
you know insurance uh well the employee
benefits most of the employee benefits
line under 4117 will come through when
we sit there and I I I have the ability
to work with Lisa to get the payroll
summary in front of the board of
selectman board selectman determines the
increases and then all of these numbers
the social security the unemployment
comp the health insurance the longevity
will all fall out from there um
Lisa and I had conversation today about
how to get all the data and and how to
put it into an appropriate format for
you guys to sit there and look at. And
that, like I said, will take care of 55%
of the total town operational
expenditures
um is payroll.
>> Lisa, I assume that you have to work off
of an older version of the, you know,
the budget spreadsheet that we've used
in past years.
tabs and the you know it has it has tabs
and you feed across and you you know
there's a tab for mill rate calculation
there's a tab for this there's a tab for
that I assume you have one of those
>> I did see a mill rate calculation in
there the the problem that I saw if it's
the one I'm thinking of is it's a
quickbooks format and to me I have no no
use for that honestly
>> um
>> I'm not sure if it's the one you're
speaking of
>> no All right. I can I
>> She She has it. She just She She It was
something that the two of us sat there
and and looked at and
we will sit there. What I was trying to
do is assist to get a report to sit
there and do all of the payroll stuff.
The mill rate will sit there and have a
separate tab for you as we build this
out. So she she it is not um the format
that we're that we're looking at now is
is something that Lisa brought and it's
it's a very valuable format as to how we
look at it. The details you guys need in
a different way and I'm working with her
to make sure that we get the details
correctly organized for you. What she
was really looking at is that
spreadsheet
um the data was kicked out of
QuickBooks, put into Excel, and then put
into that Excel format. Rob, that's all
she's after. It's it's just a a way to
export data from QuickBooks. Um
>> Okay. You know, you know what I'm
talking about though, Jeeoff, right?
Like last year when when the year before
and the year before and the year before
we have the spreadsheet that the board
of finance uses that you know ultimately
we use to bring the budget to hearing
and and whatnot and it's got many tabs
and you know if it's going to be
formatted slightly differently that's
okay I just the reason I ask is right
now what we have uh obviously lacks a
bunch of that and I just wanted to be
sure that you know Lisa had a comparison
that she could look at here's how we've
done it you Well, if there's a reason to
tweak it, okay, what I mean is, has she
seen say last year's budget spreadsheet?
>> Who who did the uh the answer the answer
is I believe that I actually sent that
to her today, Rob, to be really honest.
>> Right. Um, so why she may not be uh and
I have to look to make sure that I did
that.
>> Okay.
>> That's I just wanted to be sure. I have
one, but it's older and it was it was a
draft.
>> Yes. last year from mid-March and I
don't trust it.
>> So, so Lisa, Lisa, I sent it to you at
8:07 after I received it at 8:06.
So, um uh
>> this morning
>> this morning. So, uh the question that I
have is uh who is responsible for the
PowerPoint? I'm assuming that that was
you, Rob, right? That's you.
>> It's it's typically, you know, last year
Mark did it. Um, I'm gonna I'm gonna
lean on some of my members of my board
to help me with it. But yeah, it's
that's that's the Board of Finance
chair's job.
>> Yeah. So, the So, the
>> which I'll need to get, by the way, a
copy of an old one.
>> I think I have it. I think you have it,
Liz. Okay. Because I'm not sure. I might
have it, too. I actually back if I
scroll back in my emails, Mark sent it
around at one point.
>> Sure. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think I probably do have it.
You're right.
So, um,
>> so,
>> but, uh, but obviously, you know, that's
as much as that's good, you know, that's
that's down my priority list at the
moment, but yes, that's that's something
that's, uh, lurking in the background
that we'll need to get done, too.
>> Yep.
So, I'm thinking um maybe one thing we
can concentrate on right now would be
the AHM
the information that I sent out to
everybody. I don't know if any chance.
Okay.
>> I had no chance to look at I'm sorry.
See, I just got it.
>> I get it. I get it. Okay. That's
something maybe we can go ahead and
maybe review it for the week on our own
and then kind of come to a conclusion on
it next week.
>> Sure. And I mean I have no you were
there, right? So you know I know you
sent us the the information but you
could always
>> you know give us a little less on report
if if you want. Um we can do that now.
We could do that in our
>> in our you know regular meeting 7
o'clock. I don't care. The board of
selectman might want to hear it. It's
fine. um you know the highlights at
least
>> I just sent it to the board of finance
because
>> this the way the you know it's it's hard
to send everything to everybody because
it's becomes a meeting per se. So and
Jeff I didn't send that to you
unfortunately
but
>> always always include the treasurer on
your emails.
>> Oh really? Okay.
>> Yeah. Just so she just so she has she
has it if it relates to the budget. I
mean because one of the things that we
were discussing and I'm sorry Louisa but
one of the things is um you have the
spreadsheet the spreadsheet is fine but
the treasurer should be in control of
the spreadsheet so that you know when
you guys make adjustments and changes if
you report to her and send her an email
the next day she can then make those
updates within the spreadsheet so that
you at least have some consistency and
there's no confusion as to who has the
right one. So,
>> okay, this is more of a presentation for
everyone to review to it's kind of the
backup for I feel that it's a good
organization and I wanted everyone to
kind of read through it and kind of
determine on their own if they feel as
well and I sent out something just a
little bit while ago because that's when
I got it saying how much how many uh
Andover participants have participated
in it in the past two
So, if everyone could have a chance to
look at that.
>> Did you get an answer on that question?
>> I did. I sent that to everybody probably
half hour ago.
>> Yeah, I'm looking at it now. Uh, this is
the whole number of people served by
year
>> 24 25
>> asking for that. We'd be asking for
that. And it shows like 2000 LA in the
last year, the year before that was
almost 2000, 1976.
Right.
>> The only other thing I want to bring up
with that if you want to talk about that
is in the presentation I did ask about
um what options are available for AES
because as of right now they're only
using one and a half they only have one
and a half days worth of a person there
where in fact they could be using that
facility. They could be using
AHS a lot more, but they would have to
set up uh an agreement between the two
of them and that money would be actually
need to come out of the board of
education budget
and I was thinking in lie of and after
we listened to the presentation from AES
and won't know until that in lie of uh
maybe some extra monies that are needed
to go towards the AES budget we can
possibly do it using AHS instead is much
cheaper.
>> Well, yeah, we're we don't know until we
know what services they're able to
provide, right? if there's any services
that they can provide at a at a
significant savings that
>> and they have in the past
>> and you know and if that is also you
know meets the needs
in full
>> right like are you saving you know
that's that's something definitely to
ask
>> um the superintendent about
>> absolutely that's what I would I wanted
to share
>> I see that the the spreadsheet we have
for the town budget does appear to have
the correct number in there for AHM. So
that's good. I just matched it up.
>> Anything that I have information for is
in your spreadsheet already. Everything
that I have received, every department
that sent me all of their wishes, it's
all in that Excel spreadsheet. It really
hasn't changed since last week,
>> right? Except for the RAM number, which
we talked to,
>> right? Yep.
>> The RAM number that's in there is the
old one.
>> Yep. So, I have I saved it to my drive
and changed it, but
>> I'll leave it to you to change the
proper one.
>> Um, you know, it's not a it's a massive
difference, but it's a it's a it's a
drop, so that's nice.
>> What What is the correct RAM number?
>> The correct the total RAM levy.
>> Yep. uh this year is one moment. Let me
scroll back up to it.
>> Yeah. And if you could say what line
it's on so we can follow.
>> Yeah, that's I'm gonna I'm gonna get
there. It's I I scroll and then I
>> RAM education 44
>> and the number that I have for combined
the combined levy. So it's it's you know
the ops budget plus the capital is
4,255,542.
And I confirmed that today with Colin.
>> Say that again. 4 million.
>> 4 million 255 542.
>> So it's a 2.9% increase now.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> For our levy, their increase budget
increase is 3.31, but yes.
>> Right. Yep.
>> Because we we dropped a little bit in
terms of our enrollment.
>> Yep. Okay. So I see that number is not
the same number as on this spreadsheet.
Is that
>> right? Lisa hadn't gotten it. I I sent
it to her. I realized it. I emailed her.
She hadn't seen that and I passed on
what Colin had sent me.
>> She's not sent you all the spreadsheets.
So,
>> okay. All right. That's fine. It's It's
close anyway. Uh
>> yeah, it it drops it. It drops it a
little bit.
>> That number we really can't debate,
right? It is what it is.
>> Well, the town I mean it it is what it
is. If it passes,
the town has a referendum. the town, the
three towns have a referendum and if it
passes that then yeah, we're locked in.
Uh but obviously anybody can have their
say on that in the referendum and the
thing with the referendum is the votes
are aggregated. So it's not like if two
of the towns vote no and one town votes
yes, it it gets voted down. No, that's
not the way it works. Like they
consolidate all the votes. You know,
Andover could vote it down, but it
doesn't mean that it's not going to
pass.
>> So in the past, we've we've seen that
happen. So we'll, you know, we just we
take our chances with that.
>> Yeah.
>> Rob or Jeff, did we get um an answer
from from RAM? How many students are
going in in the next what the enrollment
is
of all Andover students next beginning
next year?
>> I thought he had that in his in his uh
>> I thought I remembered.
>> I mean there's There's a sixth grade
class obviously graduating but um I
thought Collins projections would have
included although maybe they were
aggregated they had
you know they were for the three towns
but he had his enrollment projections
for us during his presentation didn't he
>> the information that he provided me
today was 28 students
>> 28 total students from all classes
>> from
>> from andor grade
>> no just basically going into se
>> Jeff clarify.
>> I'm just telling you I just told you
there's 26 students in sixth grade that
are going to
>> 26 or 28. Sorry. 28 I'm sorry 28 six six
>> the sixth grade
the enrollment projection form that was
provided by AES to the superintendent of
RAM shows 28. Now I I mean this is this
this is where I have my problems and I
would have your board your board needs
to actually ask these questions. um
they're using this NESDEC
enrollment projection
for 10 years out and
you know the PK number was 61 right when
this was given it's now 67 but there are
out of town students in these grades and
you got to find out the number because
you can't sit there and do this without
understanding what's going to happen and
what's who's out of town and who's in
town and she this is being reported to
the Colin and I'd like to know and not
only that I'd like to know if we're if
we as residents are paying for out of
town students
>> I mean we keep going round and round on
this Jeff
>> 67 or 60 we have 67 or I thought it was
either 67 or 69 total preschool kids
>> we have like nine out oftowners and I
think there's five uh staff kids. So,
and I think those are probably out of
town, too. I don't I don't recall off
the top of my head. So, that's that'd be
14 out of 67 or 69. The numbers can
fluctuate throughout the course of the
year because people age in, people test
in, etc.
So I I don't know what the state or
whatever that projection system does
visav that.
I also don't know that projecting out
from prek all the way to seventh grade
accounting for that
is even really anything resembling an
exact science, right? It's always going
to be a fuzzy projection that far out. I
mean, we're not talking about one grade
year going up. We're talking about prek.
>> Every one every 1% Rob on that costs our
town $340,000.
So RAM RAM is expensive. There's no
doubt about it. And so we as a group
have to sit there and learn it. So I
just sit there and I go, if you if you
believe that there's there's 14 out
oftowners and they're paying at a
maximum $6,000 of tuition, you're not
covering your costs.
>> You keep saying this and then the
superintendent keeps telling you that
it's not so. And I, you know, I don't
know what to make.
>> Prove it to me. I'm asking you as a
board, you guys have to get the proof
because Rob, just from a standpoint of a
prek, a standard prek from a private uh
business is going to be $12,000.
You're charging six.
>> All right. Well, you know, I came here
today to try to talk about the town
budget. We can't really do it because
we've got squat for information. And now
I guess we're just going to fall back on
talking about the pre-k again.
>> Um the question came up about how many
people were going into seventh grade.
>> Yeah, I know. And we have the answer.
>> Yeah. And what I'm trying to tell you is
the information being provided to RAM is
including out of town students.
>> You're you're you're talking about a
projection from prek onward. I mean,
we're talking about next year.
>> You're talking about something that's,
you know, seven years, six, seven years.
If you don't adjust your tuition, you're
going to have a problem. So, I want to
adjust tuition.
>> Okay, that's at least fair.
>> So, my concern my concern about the fact
that they use the NES SDEC number is
it's an aggregate number of preK through
six and we know that our pre school is
extra large because they've expanded it.
So to use that number doesn't give RAM
an accurate number to do its
projections. So that's that's a concern
for me. Um I mean RAM has to do what
they have to do. Um but if they're
basing it on if they're basing their
projections on that number, it's not
even accurate for them.
>> So let's think of it this way. next year
in the next couple years, all those
pre-K kids will have shuffled up into
kindergarten, right? So, what's now
pre-K, they'll be in they'll be in K or
what?
>> Not all of them.
>> Not all.
>> Well, not all of them. That's just it.
So, because the in town kids will, you
know, for the most part, obviously,
unless one gets outplaced or I
understand that,
>> but I mean, all right, I hear you. Um,
and I I guess
I don't I guess I don't share the same
worry about this, but I hear you. Um,
>> can I ask a question?
>> So, if there's 28 kids going into
seventh grade now,
>> and there's approximately 53 Andover
preschool kids now, right? If you take
out the out oftowners, is that right?
>> Something like that. Yeah,
>> something like that. So is Ram basing
their budget off they're basing it off
of the 28 not the 53 right don't they
wait gets closer
>> this is a discussion about the the
projection for 20 30 whatever
you know the issue of the prek
>> well we're talking about the projection
for next year we're talking about that
>> 28 right
>> which is a much firmer number either way
because it's immediate I mean you don't
you know we don't know what the what the
starting next year's kindergarten in
class by the time they get to sixth
grade and then go to RAM would be that
that's again it's a guesstimate. I
understand the issue with you know how
the numbers are fed in and and crunched.
But it's also like that's way down the
road and I'm not really sure
when RAM budgets they don't budget they
don't they're never making a budget
looking at what 2032 is going to be.
They're talking about their next year.
So, it's a little
>> That's what I was Yeah, that's what I
was asking.
>> Well, that's
Apologies. I got some kids stopping in
for a second, guys. I'm out of meeting.
Okay. Yeah, no problem.
>> Kim, did you did you have something?
>> Kim? Um, no. I'm all set. Thank you.
Um okay sorry about that. Um
well you know again we we have we have
as on the fourth
um
do we have anything further or actually
given the time what would be if we don't
really have anything concrete we can do
right now my inclination would be to do
public speak do a motion to adjurnn shut
the recording down and everybody we
relog in on with the next for the second
meeting of those of you who are going to
attend the the board of finance meeting
that is anybody have anything further
they want to bring up before I go ahead
and call for that
once it's going twice. Okay. Public
speak. Uh Joanne, you got anything for
us? I really do, Rob. I'll make it
really quick, but I think it's important
after listening to this meeting. Um I
just want to again commend the new
treasurer for being present at every
town meeting since she's come on board.
I can't say enough how much we wanted
that in the past having been a board of
finance med uh member and then having
you be in control of the spreadsheet is
so key because mistakes were made. It
just makes sense. So bravo to you for
being here and giving all your time. The
other thing I don't know um I just feel
like I have to comment on this because a
question was asked and I don't feel like
you all that are an important board got
a really good answer.
um the undertaking.
I believe in confidentiality,
professionalism, the whole bit. So, I
won't slay that at all. But I think it's
important that, you know, a really
professional process has been in place
to hire a new um town administrator. The
people that were chosen to be on that
committee were really committed, gave a
lot of time and effort. So, I just don't
think that came across. It kind of was
slushed over. So, um, you know, it goes
through its process, then it gets put in
the hands of the board of selectmen, and
then they'll do what they think is the
best thing for the town. So, um, just
know that everybody gave a lot of
commitment. It wasn't, you know,
anything that wasn't full of integrity.
Um, you know, comments were made by the
whole committee as they should be and
then, you know, the people in charge of
our town will make their decisions,
which they should. Um, the other thing
is has because it hasn't been brought up
and it keeps being said that Jim's
leaving, which shouldn't be, you know,
which he's done such a great job. I've
met him. Has anyone just thought of
having him remain as a virtual town
administrator for a while through email,
through the way things are so virtual
these days?
um instead of going without a town
administrator until the BOS comes to
their decisions, possibly keep them on
as virtual and through email, through
phones and things of that nature. Thank
you so much. Good luck with all you need
to do.
>> Thanks, Joanne. I appreciate it. Um
okay, Dennis, did you have anything
further? I I think you've
>> No, I made my point. As long as there
was every everybody that's here now was
here when I spoke. I just want to make
sure everybody is aware of the, you
know, I I I'm just trying to get, you
know, the process correct. I I I I just,
that's my job. I'm a lawyer sworn to
uphold the law. I am uh, you know, I'm
probably one of the biggest supporters
of public education you're ever going to
meet. I I have worked on budgets for
years here and all over the place. And
but I it it isn't about that to with me.
It's about doing things right, doing it
correctly. And I believe that I'm right
that you you do have the authority to uh
adjust the board of finance budget
before it goes to town meeting. And you
know, you're going to hear that from me
again unless I change my mind, which so
far doesn't look like it.
>> Well, yeah, I think I've read three or
four things from you now on on that.
>> Okay. I've written enough, I think.
>> Um
>> thank you, Dennis. Uh so I I see
something here. Naturescape LLC. I'm
sorry. I'm not I'm not sure who that is.
Marcy.
>> Oh, hi Marcy.
>> Marcy,
>> hi. Yeah, sorry I got on late. I didn't
know it said that. I thought it had my
name on there, but anyway. Uh yeah, I'm
sorry I got on late. I I feel like I
missed a lot. And uh and uh you were
talking about uh the um uh kids that are
going into kindergarten. And the last
number I got was 25. So I think that's
pretty consistent with the numbers that
we've had uh for the other grades,
>> right?
>> So
>> and I think also in preschool it's it's
not just two years. Some I think some
kids might be in that for three years.
>> It's where it's more complicated than
that. It's like they can age in at two
years
nine months.
>> 2.9
>> 2.9. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think they have the like uh two
like they can be three in January,
>> right?
>> And it used to be like that for
kindergarten, but now kindergarten's
changed,
>> right?
>> So anyway, thanks.
>> Well, thank you. Appreciate it.
>> Okay. Like I said, you know, we've got
our schedule here. So, I think that's
everything for for public speak. Speak
up if I've missed you. If not, um I'd
like to entertain a motion to adjurnn
and switch over to our other meeting.
>> I'll make the motion to adjurnn.
>> Thanks, Luis. I have a second.
>> No, seconded.
>> Thanks, Liz. All right. All in favor?
>> I
>> All right. Thank you very much. Let's
set the recording